README.md, before:

## 🦊📦 foxbox

foxbox is a simplistic, rootless process isolation runtime and CLI tool
based on Linux user namespaces.

It’s a fun project created to explore and better understand what’s behind
the high-level abstractions of existing container runtimes like Docker or
Podman.

A lot of the initial process isolation code is based on [Liz Rice’s
“Containers From Scratch”][lizrice], [Lizzie Dixon’s Linux containers in
500 lines of code”][lizzie500], and runc’s [libcontainer][runc].

Note: better not use foxbox in prod. I run shady fluff in prod and even I
wouldn’t run this there (yet, hehe).

[lizrice]: https://github.com/lizrice/containers-from-scratch
[lizzie500]: https://blog.lizzie.io/linux-containers-in-500-loc.html
[runc]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc

## Terminology

Purely for fun, containers are named _foxboxes_ (or _boxes_ for short).
Likewise, tasks in containers are just called _foxes_.

## Usage

For now, clone the repo and then run `go run ./cmd/foxbox` to access the
cli tool.

To run a foxbox, you need a compatible image. So far, I’ve only used the
[alpine 3.18.4 rootfs][alpine]. Download that rootfs to `./images` The
resulting file name excluding the file extention (must be `.tar` or
`.tar.gz`), e.g. `alpine-minirootfs-3.18.4-x86_64` is the image name in
foxbox.

To create a foxbox and run a shell, execute the following in the project
root:

```sh
go run ./cmd/foxbox run --rm alpine-3.18.4-x86_64
```

Run the `hostname` to get the box name. To find the rootfs, head to
`./runtime/BOXNAME/boxfs` on the host machine, where `BOXNAME` is the
hostname of the box.

[alpine]: https://dl-cdn.alpinelinux.org/alpine/v3.18/releases/x86_64/alpine-minirootfs-3.18.4-x86_64.tar.gz

## Features

While interop is really cool, I’m not planning to make foxbox compatible
with the OCI runtime spec, though it might be a fun challenge later on.

- [x] Create and delete foxboxes from rootfs tarballs
- [x] List all foxboxes
- [ ] List running foxes
- [ ] Enter foxboxes by with [nsenter][nsenter]
- [ ] Box inspect (analog to `podman inspect`)
- [ ] Run foxes detached
- [ ] Store logs
- Isolation
  - [x] User namespaces
  - [x] Dropping kernel capabilities
  - [x] Syscall restriction with seccomp
  - [x] Standard streams (stdin, stdout, stderr)
  - [x] `/dev/{null,zero,urandom,random,tty}` access
  - [x] Cgroups v2 (cpu, memory, pids)
- Networking
  - [ ] Host networking
  - [x] slirp4netns
  - [ ] Port forwarding
- Image management
  - [ ] List/show images
  - [ ] Pull images from registry
  - [ ] Remove images
  - [ ] Building images (Boxfile? Foxfile?)
- Volumes
  - [ ] Global volumes
  - [x] Local volumes (`-v $(pwd):/workdir`)
  - [ ] tempfs mounts
- [ ] Store foxboxes in a fixed place (e.g. `/var` or `~/.foxbox`)
- [ ] Run as daemon to simplify configs

[ociif]: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec
[nsenter]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/blob/main/libcontainer/nsenter/README.md

### Nice-to-haves

- [ ] (maybe) Use [OCI Image Format][ociif] for images

Commit message:

Add next steps to README

README.md, after:

## 🦊📦 foxbox

foxbox is a simplistic, rootless process isolation runtime and CLI tool
based on Linux user namespaces.

It’s a fun project created to explore and better understand what’s behind
the high-level abstractions of existing container runtimes like Docker or
Podman.

A lot of the initial process isolation code is based on [Liz Rice’s
“Containers From Scratch”][lizrice], [Lizzie Dixon’s Linux containers in
500 lines of code”][lizzie500], and runc’s [libcontainer][runc].

Note: better not use foxbox in prod. I run shady fluff in prod and even I
wouldn’t run this there (yet, hehe).

[lizrice]: https://github.com/lizrice/containers-from-scratch
[lizzie500]: https://blog.lizzie.io/linux-containers-in-500-loc.html
[runc]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc

## Terminology

Purely for fun, containers are named _foxboxes_ (or _boxes_ for short).
Likewise, tasks in containers are just called _foxes_.

## Usage

For now, clone the repo and then run `go run ./cmd/foxbox` to access the
cli tool.

To run a foxbox, you need a compatible image. So far, I’ve only used the
[alpine 3.18.4 rootfs][alpine]. Download that rootfs to `./images` The
resulting file name excluding the file extention (must be `.tar` or
`.tar.gz`), e.g. `alpine-minirootfs-3.18.4-x86_64` is the image name in
foxbox.

To create a foxbox and run a shell, execute the following in the project
root:

```sh
go run ./cmd/foxbox run --rm alpine-3.18.4-x86_64
```

Run the `hostname` to get the box name. To find the rootfs, head to
`./runtime/BOXNAME/boxfs` on the host machine, where `BOXNAME` is the
hostname of the box.

[alpine]: https://dl-cdn.alpinelinux.org/alpine/v3.18/releases/x86_64/alpine-minirootfs-3.18.4-x86_64.tar.gz

## Next steps

foxbox should be more usable out of the box (heh!).

Running `foxbox run --rm alpine` should get the `alpine` image for you
and spin up a box. Likewise, being able to build your own images would
add more uses to foxbox.

Right now, foxbox is a standalone CLI but this makes it more complicated
for concurrent use. I see two ways forward: keep it a standalone CLI, so
it’s easier to use but hard to integrate with, or separate the CLI from
the engine, so it runs as daemon similar to how Docker or Podman work.

A standalone CLI would be more directly educational but having it
separated would potentially allow scripting with it and using it
programmatically. The latter would also prevent resource conflicts but
I’m not sure how necessary that is.

## Features

While interop is really cool, I’m not planning to make foxbox compatible
with the OCI runtime spec, though it might be a fun challenge later on.

- [x] Create and delete foxboxes from rootfs tarballs
- [x] List all foxboxes
- [ ] List running foxes
- [ ] Enter foxboxes by with [nsenter][nsenter]
- [ ] Box inspect (analog to `podman inspect`)
- [ ] Run foxes detached
- [ ] Store logs
- Isolation
  - [x] User namespaces
  - [x] Dropping kernel capabilities
  - [x] Syscall restriction with seccomp
  - [x] Standard streams (stdin, stdout, stderr)
  - [x] `/dev/{null,zero,urandom,random,tty}` access
  - [x] Cgroups v2 (cpu, memory, pids)
- Networking
  - [ ] Host networking
  - [x] slirp4netns
  - [ ] Port forwarding
- Image management
  - [ ] List/show images
  - [ ] Pull images from registry
  - [ ] Remove images
  - [ ] Building images (Boxfile? Foxfile?)
- Volumes
  - [ ] Global volumes
  - [x] Local volumes (`-v $(pwd):/workdir`)
  - [ ] tempfs mounts
- [ ] Store foxboxes in a fixed place (e.g. `/var` or `~/.foxbox`)
- [ ] Run as daemon to simplify configs

[ociif]: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec
[nsenter]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/blob/main/libcontainer/nsenter/README.md

### Nice-to-haves

- [ ] (maybe) Use [OCI Image Format][ociif] for images
